Machine Learning Tutorial
Last Updated :
5 Jun, 2026
Machine learning is a branch of Artificial Intelligence that focuses on developing models and algorithms that let computers learn from data without being explicitly programmed for every task. In simple words, ML teaches systems to think and understand like humans by learning from the data.

introduction_to_machine_learning.webpintroduction_to_machine_learning.webp

Machine Learning is mainly divided into three core types:

Supervised Learning: Trains models on labeled data to predict or classify new, unseen data.
Unsupervised Learning: Finds patterns or groups in unlabeled data, like clustering or dimensionality reduction.
Reinforcement Learning: Learns through trial and error to maximize rewards, ideal for decision-making tasks.
Note: The following are not part of the original three core types of ML, but they have become increasingly important in real-world applications, especially in deep learning.

Additional Types:

Self-Supervised Learning: It is often considered as a  subset of unsupervised learning, but it has grown into its own field due to its success in training large-scale models. It generates its own labels from the data, without any manual labeling.
Semi-Supervised Learning: This approach combines a small amount of labeled data with a large amount of unlabeled data. It’s useful when labeling data is expensive or time-consuming.
Module 1: Machine Learning Pipeline
This section covers preprocessing, exploratory data analysis and model evaluation to prepare data, uncover insights and build reliable models.

1. Data Preprocessing
Introduction
ML workflow
Data Cleaning
Data Preprocessing in Python
Feature Scaling
Feature Extraction
Feature Engineering
Feature Selection Techniques
2. Exploratory Data Analysis
Exploratory Data Analysis
Exploratory Data Analysis in Python
Advance EDA
Time Series Data Visualization
3. Model Evaluation
Regularization in Machine Learning
Confusion Matrix
Precision, Recall and F1-Score
AUC-ROC Curve
Cross-validation
Hyperparameter Tuning
Module 2: Supervised Learning
Supervised learning algorithms are generally categorized into two main types:

Classification: where the goal is to predict discrete labels or categories
Regression: where the aim is to predict continuous numerical values.
supervised_learning
Supervised Learning
There are many algorithms used in supervised learning each suited to different types of problems. Some of the most commonly used supervised learning algorithms are:

1. Linear Regression
This is one of the simplest ways to predict numbers using a straight line. It helps find the relationship between input and output.

Introduction to Linear Regression
Gradient Descent in Linear Regression
Multiple Linear Regression
2. Logistic Regression
Used when the output is a "yes or no" type answer. It helps in predicting categories like pass/fail or spam/not spam.

Understanding Logistic Regression
Cost function in Logistic Regression
3. Decision Trees
A model that makes decisions by asking a series of simple questions, like a flowchart. Easy to understand and use.

Decision Tree in Machine Learning
Types of Decision tree algorithms
Decision Tree - Regression (Implementation)
Decision tree - Classification (Implementation)
4. Support Vector Machines (SVM)
A bit more advanced—it tries to draw the best line (or boundary) to separate different categories of data.

Understanding SVMs
SVM Hyperparameter Tuning - GridSearchCV
Non-Linear SVM
5. k-Nearest Neighbors (k-NN)
This model looks at the closest data points (neighbors) to make predictions. Super simple and based on similarity.

Introduction to KNN
Decision Boundaries in K-Nearest Neighbors (KNN)
6. Naïve Bayes
A quick and smart way to classify things based on probability. It works well for text and spam detection.

Introduction to Naive Bayes
Gaussian Naive Bayes
Multinomial Naive Bayes
Bernoulli Naive Bayes
Complement Naive Bayes
7. Random Forest (Bagging Algorithm)
A powerful model that builds lots of decision trees and combines them for better accuracy and stability.

Introduction to Random forest
Random Forest Classifier
Random Forest Regression
Hyperparameter Tuning in Random Forest
8. Introduction to Ensemble Learning
Ensemble learning combines multiple simple models to create a stronger, smarter model. There are mainly two types of ensemble learning:

Bagging that combines multiple models trained independently.
Boosting that builds models sequentially each correcting the errors of the previous one.
Module 3: Unsupervised learning
Unsupervised learning are again divided into three main categories based on their purpose:

Clustering
Association Rule Mining
Dimensionality Reduction
unsupervised_learning
Unsupervised learning
1. Clustering
Clustering algorithms group data points into clusters based on their similarities or differences. Types of clustering algorithms are:

Centroid-based Methods:

K-Means clustering
Elbow Method for optimal value of k in KMeans
K-Means++ clustering
K-Mode clustering
Fuzzy C-Means (FCM) Clustering
Distribution-based Methods:

Gaussian mixture models
Expectation-Maximization Algorithm
Dirichlet process mixture models (DPMMs)
Connectivity based methods:

Hierarchical clustering
Agglomerative Clustering
Divisive clustering
Affinity propagation
Density Based methods:

DBSCAN (Density-Based Spatial Clustering of Applications with Noise)
OPTICS (Ordering Points To Identify the Clustering Structure)
2. Dimensionality Reduction
Dimensionality reduction is used to simplify datasets by reducing the number of features while retaining the most important information.

Principal Component Analysis (PCA)
t-distributed Stochastic Neighbor Embedding (t-SNE)
Non-negative Matrix Factorization (NMF)
Independent Component Analysis (ICA)
Isomap
Locally Linear Embedding (LLE)
3. Association Rule
Find patterns between items in large datasets typically in market basket analysis.

Apriori algorithm
Implementing apriori algorithm
FP-Growth (Frequent Pattern-Growth)
ECLAT (Equivalence Class Clustering and bottom-up Lattice Traversal)
Module 4: Reinforcement Learning
Reinforcement learning interacts with environment and learn from them based on rewards.

agent
Reinforcement Learning
1. Model-Based Methods
These methods use a model of the environment to predict outcomes and help the agent plan actions by simulating potential results.

Markov decision processes (MDPs)
Bellman equation
Value iteration algorithm
Monte Carlo Tree Search
2. Model-Free Methods
The agent learns directly from experience by interacting with the environment and adjusting its actions based on feedback.

Q-Learning
SARSA
Monte Carlo Methods
Reinforce Algorithm
Actor-Critic Algorithm
Asynchronous Advantage Actor-Critic (A3C)
Module 5: Semi Supervised Learning
It uses a mix of labeled and unlabeled data making it helpful when labeling data is costly or it is very limited.

semi_supervised_learning
Semi Supervised Learning
Semi Supervised Classification
Self-Training in Semi-Supervised Learning
Few-shot learning in Machine Learning
Module 6: Forecasting Models
Forecasting models analyze past data to predict future trends, commonly used for time series problems like sales, demand or stock prices.

ARIMA (Auto-Regressive Integrated Moving Average)
SARIMA (Seasonal ARIMA)
Exponential Smoothing (Holt-Winters)
Module 7: Deployment of ML Models
The trained ML model must be integrated into an application or service to make its predictions accessible.

Machine learning deployment
Deploy ML Model using Streamlit Library
Deploy ML web app on Heroku
Create UIs for prototyping Machine Learning model with Gradio
APIs allow other applications or systems to access the ML model's functionality and integrate them into larger workflows.

Deploy Machine Learning Model using Flask
Deploying ML Models as API using FastAPI
MLOps ensure they are deployed, monitored and maintained efficiently in real-world production systems.

MLOps
Continuous Integration and Continuous Deployment (CI/CD) in MLOps
End-to-End MLOps
For project ideas refer to: 100+ Machine Learning Projects with Source Code [2025] for hands-on implementation on projects
After machine learning and have hands on experience in it we can start with deep learning from here: Deep Learning Tutorial


Introduction to Machine Learning
Last Updated :
29 May, 2026
Machine Learning is a technique that allows computers to learn from data and make decisions without explicit programming. It works by identifying patterns in data and using them to make predictions. It is used in areas such as:

Image Recognition
Speech Processing
Language Translation
Recommender Systems
why_machine_learning_matters.webpwhy_machine_learning_matters.webp
Need for Machine Learning
Machine Learning is important because traditional programming cannot handle complex tasks or large amounts of data efficiently. ML overcomes this by learning from data and making predictions without fixed rules. It is needed for the following reasons:

1. Solving Complex Business Problems
Traditional programming struggles with tasks like language understanding and medical diagnosis. ML learns from data and predicts outcomes easily.

Examples:

Image and speech recognition in healthcare.
Language translation and sentiment analysis.
2. Handling Large Volumes of Data
The internet generates huge amounts of data every day. Machine Learning processes and analyzes this data quickly by providing valuable insights and real time predictions.

Examples:

Fraud detection in financial transactions.
Personalized feed recommendations on Facebook and Instagram from billions of interactions.
3. Automate Repetitive Tasks
ML automates time consuming, repetitive tasks with high accuracy hence reducing manual work and errors.

Examples:

Gmail filtering spam emails automatically.
Chatbots handling order tracking and password resets.
Automating large scale invoice analysis for key insights.
4. Personalized User Experience
ML enhances user experience by tailoring recommendations to individual preferences. It analyze user behavior to deliver highly relevant content.

Examples:

Netflix suggesting movies and TV shows based on our viewing history.
E-commerce sites recommending products we're likely to buy.
5. Self Improvement in Performance
ML models evolve and improve with more data helps in making them smarter over time. They adapt to user behavior and increase their performance.

Examples:

Voice assistants like Siri and Alexa learning our preferences and accents.
Search engines refining results based on user interaction.
Self driving cars improving decisions using millions of miles of driving data.
How Machines Learn from Data
A machine learns by finding patterns in data and improving over time without explicit programming. It adapts with experience to make more accurate predictions. This learning happens through the following steps:

Data Input: Machine needs data like text, images or numbers to analyze. Good quality and enough quantity of data are important for effective learning.
Algorithms: Algorithms are mathematical methods that help the machine find patterns in data. Different algorithms help different tasks such as classification or regression.
Model Training: During training, the machine adjusts its internal settings to better predict outcomes. It learns by reducing the difference between its predictions and actual results.
Feedback Loop: Machine compares its predictions with true outcomes and uses this feedback to correct errors. Techniques like gradient descent help it update and improve.
Experience and Iteration: Machine repeats training many times with data helps in refining its predictions with each pass, more data and iterations improve accuracy.
Evaluation and Generalization: Tested on new data to ensure real world performance
Data is the foundation of machine learning because models learn patterns and make predictions from it. Good quality and diverse data help improve accuracy, performance and real-world results.

Types of Machine Learning
There are mainly three types of machine learning which are as follows:

Supervised Learning: Learns from labeled data where correct outputs are already known to make predictions or classifications.
Unsupervised Learning: Learns from unlabeled data by finding hidden patterns, similarities, or groups automatically.
Reinforcement Learning: Learns through trial and error by receiving rewards for correct actions and penalties for wrong ones.
To know more about types refer to: Types of Machine Learning

Benefits of Machine Learning
Machine Learning improves processes by automating tasks and extracting insights from data, making systems smarter and more efficient.

Automates repetitive tasks and improves productivity
Finds patterns in large data for better decisions
Provides customized recommendations and experiences
Enables robots and systems to perform complex tasks accurately
Challenges
ML models learn from training data and if the data is biased, model’s decisions can be unfair so it’s important to select and monitor data carefully.
Since it depends on large amounts of data, there is a risk of sensitive information being exposed so protecting privacy is important.
Complex ML models can be difficult to understand which makes it difficult to explain why they make certain decisions. This can affect trust and accountability.
Automation may replace some jobs so retraining and helping workers learn new skills is important to adapt to these changes.
Applications
In healthcare it diagnoses diseases, predicts outcomes and personalizes treatments
In finance detects fraud, supports trading and assesses credit risk
Recommends products, forecasts demand and analyzes customer behavior
Powers self-driving cars, optimizes routes and predicts maintenance
Recommends content and enables image/speech recognition
Detects defects and predicts machine failures

Machine Learning Lifecycle
Last Updated :
1 Jun, 2026
Machine Learning Lifecycle is a structured process used to develop, train, deploy and maintain machine learning models efficiently. It includes multiple stages such as data collection, preprocessing, model training, evaluation and monitoring to ensure accurate and reliable predictions.

Provides a systematic workflow for building scalable and reliable ML models
Helps continuously improve model performance through monitoring and retraining
machine_learning_lifecycle
Machine Learning Lifecycle
Step 1: Problem Definition
The first step is clearly defining the problem that needs to be solved. A well-framed problem provides the foundation to determine the project goals, expected outcomes and the type of solution required.

Ensures alignment between business needs and technical solutions
Define project objectives, scope and success criteria
Ensure clarity in desired outcomes
Step 2: Data Collection
Data Collection phase involves systematic collection of datasets that can be used as raw data to train model. The quality and variety of data directly affect the model’s performance.

Here are some basic features of Data Collection:

Relevance: Collect data should be relevant to the defined problem and include necessary features.
Quality: Ensure data quality by considering factors like accuracy and ethical use.
Quantity: Gather sufficient data volume to train a robust model.
Diversity: Include diverse datasets to capture a broad range of scenarios and patterns.
Step 3: Data Cleaning and Preprocessing
Raw data is often messy and unstructured and if we use this data directly to train then it can lead to poor accuracy. We need to do data cleaning and preprocessing which often involves:

Data Cleaning: Address issues such as missing values, outliers and inconsistencies in the data.
Data Preprocessing: Standardize formats, scale values and encode categorical variables for consistency.
Data Quality: Ensure that the data is well-organized and prepared for meaningful analysis.
Step 4: Exploratory Data Analysis (EDA)
To find patterns and characteristics hidden in the data Exploratory Data Analysis (EDA) is used to uncover insights and understand the dataset's structure. During EDA patterns, trends and insights are provided which may not be visible by naked eyes. This valuable insight can be used to make informed decision.

Here are the basic features of Exploratory Data Analysis:

Exploration: Use statistical and visual tools to explore patterns in data.
Patterns and Trends: Identify underlying patterns, trends and potential challenges within the dataset.
Insights: Gain valuable insights for informed decisions making in later stages.
Decision Making: Use EDA for feature engineering and model selection.
Step 5: Feature Engineering and Selection
Feature engineering and selection is a transformative process that involve selecting only relevant features to enhance model efficiency and prediction while reducing complexity.

Here are the basic features of Feature Engineering and Selection:

Feature Engineering: Create new features or transform existing ones to capture better patterns and relationships.
Feature Selection: Identify subset of features that most significantly impact the model's performance.
Domain Expertise: Use domain knowledge to engineer features that contribute meaningfully for prediction.
Optimization: Balance set of features for accuracy while minimizing computational complexity.
Step 6: Model Selection
For a good machine learning model, model selection is a very important part as we need to find model that aligns with our defined problem, nature of the data, complexity of problem and the desired outcomes.

Here are the basic features of Model Selection:

Complexity: Consider the complexity of the problem and the nature of the data when choosing a model.
Decision Factors: Evaluate factors like performance, interpretability and scalability when selecting a model.
Experimentation: Experiment with different models to find the best fit for the problem.
Step 7: Model Training
With the selected model the machine learning lifecycle moves to model training process. This process involves exposing model to historical data allowing it to learn patterns, relationships and dependencies within the dataset.

Here are the basic features of Model Training:

Iterative Process: Train the model iteratively, adjusting parameters to minimize errors and enhance accuracy.
Optimization: Fine-tune model to optimize its predictive capabilities.
Validation: Rigorously train model to ensure accuracy to new unseen data.
Step 8: Model Evaluation and Tuning
Model evaluation involves rigorous testing against validation or test datasets to test accuracy of model on new unseen data. It provides insights into model's strengths and weaknesses. If the model fails to acheive desired performance levels we may need to tune model again and adjust its hyperparameters to enhance predictive accuracy.

Here are the basic features of Model Evaluation and Tuning:

Evaluation Metrics: Use metrics like accuracy, precision, recall and F1 score to evaluate model performance.
Strengths and Weaknesses: Identify the strengths and weaknesses of the model through rigorous testing.
Iterative Improvement: Initiate model tuning to adjust hyperparameters and enhance predictive accuracy.
Model Robustness: Iterative tuning to achieve desired levels of model robustness and reliability.
Step 9: Model Deployment
Now model is ready for deployment for real-world application. It involves integrating the predictive model with existing systems allowing business to use this for informed decision-making.

Here are the basic features of Model Deployment:

Integrate with existing systems
Enable decision-making using predictions
Ensure deployment scalability and security
Provide APIs or pipelines for production use
Step 10: Model Monitoring and Maintenance
After Deployment models must be monitored to ensure they perform well over time. Regular tracking helps detect data drift, accuracy drops or changing patterns and retraining may be needed to keep the model reliable in real-world use.

Here are the basic features of Model Monitoring and Maintenance:

Track model performance over time
Detect data drift or concept drift
Update and retrain the model when accuracy drops
Maintain logs and alerts for real-time issues

Data Cleaning
Last Updated :
28 Apr, 2026
Data cleaning is the process of preparing raw data by detecting and correcting errors so it can be effectively used for analysis. It is a foundational step in data preprocessing that ensures datasets are suitable for analytical, statistical and machine learning tasks.

Raw data is often noisy, incomplete and inconsistent which can negatively impact the accuracy of the model.
Clean datasets are also important in EDA (Exploratory Data Analysis), which enhances the interpretability of data so that the right actions can be taken based on insights.
data_cleaning_process.webpdata_cleaning_process.webp
Common Data Anomalies
Data quality issues can arise from human errors, system failures or problems during data collection and integration. Some of the most common data quality challenges include:

Missing values: Incomplete records can reduce statistical power and introduce bias into analysis.
Duplicate records: Repeated entries may overrepresent certain observations resulting in skewed outcomes.
Incorrect data types: Mismatched formats, such as text stored in numeric fields can cause calculation errors and analysis failures.
Outliers and anomalies: Extremely high or low values can distort statistical measures and influence model performance.
Inconsistent formats: Variations in date formats, text casing or measurement units can create issues when merging or comparing datasets.
Spelling and typographical errors: Errors in text fields can lead to incorrect grouping, classification or interpretation of categorical data
Data Cleaning Process
1. Assess Data Quality
The first step in data cleaning is to assess the quality of your data. This involves checking for:

Missing Values: Identify any blank or null values in the dataset. Missing values can be due to various reasons such as incomplete data collection, data entry errors or data loss during transmission.
Incorrect Values: Check for values that are outside the expected range or are inconsistent with the data type.
Inconsistencies in Data Format: Verify that the data format is consistent throughout the dataset.
quadrilaterals
Imperfect Dataframe
After assessing data quality, several issues can be identified in the dataset:

Rows 1 and 6 are duplicates indicating potential data duplication that may distort analysis.
Row 7 has a missing value in the "Name" column, which could impact calculations or summaries.
The "Date" column uses the "YYYY-MM-DD" format, but it is important to maintain this consistency across all entries.
The score of 100 in row 7 may be an outlier depending on the scoring system, which could skew statistical analysis.
2. Remove Irrelevant Data
Removing irrelevant or duplicate data ensures the dataset is clean, accurate and meaningful, preventing skewed analysis and improving overall quality.

Identify duplicate entries using techniques like sorting, grouping or hashing.
Remove duplicate records to ensure each data point is unique and correctly represented.
Detect redundant observations that do not add new information to the dataset.
Eliminate variables or columns that are irrelevant to the analysis and do not provide useful insights.
imperfect_dataframe
Remove Irrelevant Data
In the deduplicated DataFrame, the duplicate rows 1 and 6 have been removed to ensure each record is unique

3. Fix Structural Errors
Structural errors occur when data formats, naming conventions or variable types are inconsistent which can affect analysis accuracy. Correcting these issues ensures uniform and reliable data representation.

Standardize data formats to maintain consistency in dates, times and other data types across the dataset.
Correct naming inconsistencies in column names, variable names or labels to ensure clarity and uniformity.
Ensure consistent data representation such as using the same units for measurements or the same scales for ratings.
dataframe_with_standardized_date_fromat
Fix Structural Errors
4. Handle Missing Data
Missing data can introduce bias and reduce the reliability of analysis. Properly addressing missing values helps maintain the integrity of your dataset.

Impute missing values using statistical methods such as mean, median or mode to fill gaps.
Remove records with missing values when the missing data is extensive or cannot be accurately imputed.
Apply advanced imputation techniques like regression, k-nearest neighbors or decision trees to estimate missing values.
dataframe_with_handled_missing_values
Handle Missing Data
The missing value in the 'Name' column (row 7) has been filled with 'Unknown' to indicate unavailable data, ensuring the dataset remains complete and consistent.

5. Normalize Data
Data normalization organizes the dataset to reduce redundancy and ensure consistency making it easier to manage and analyze.

Split data into multiple tables, with each table storing specific types of information.
Ensure consistency across the dataset to support efficient querying and accurate analysis.
normalized_data_scores_
Normalize Data
6. Identify and Manage Outliers
Outliers are data points that deviate significantly from the rest of the dataset and can affect analysis accuracy. Properly handling them ensures more reliable insights.

Remove outliers that result from errors or are not representative of the population.
Transform extreme but valid outliers to reduce their impact on the analysis.
dataframe_with_managed_outliers
Manage Outliers
Implementation for Data Cleaning
Let's understand each step for Database Cleaning using titanic dataset.

You can download the dataset from here.

Step 1: Import Libraries and Load Dataset
We will import all the necessary libraries i.e pandas and numpy.


import pandas as pd
import numpy as np

df = pd.read_csv('Titanic-Dataset.csv')
df.info()
df.head()
Output:

Screenshot-2025-08-29-122359.webpScreenshot-2025-08-29-122359.webp
Step 2: Check for Duplicate Rows
df.duplicated(): Returns a boolean Series indicating duplicate rows.

df.duplicated()
Output:

Screenshot-2025-08-29-122420
Duplicated Data
Step 3: Identify Column Data Types
List comprehension with .dtype attribute to separate categorical and numerical columns.
object dtype: Generally used for text or categorical data.

cat_col = [col for col in df.columns if df[col].dtype == 'object']
num_col = [col for col in df.columns if df[col].dtype != 'object']

print('Categorical columns:', cat_col)
print('Numerical columns:', num_col)
Output:

Screenshot-2025-08-29-123218
Column Data Types
Step 4: Count Unique Values in the Categorical Columns
df[cat_col].nunique(): Returns count of unique values per column.

df[cat_col].nunique()
Output:

Screenshot-2025-08-29-122434
Unique Values
Step 5: Calculate Missing Values as Percentage
df.isnull(): Detects missing values, returning boolean DataFrame.
Sum missing across columns, normalize by total rows and multiply by 100.

round((df.isnull().sum() / df.shape[0]) * 100, 2)
Output:

Screenshot-2025-08-29-122442
Missing Value Percentage
Step 6: Drop Irrelevant or Data-Heavy Missing Columns
df.drop(columns=[]): Drops specified columns from the DataFrame.
df.dropna(subset=[]): Removes rows where specified columns have missing values.
fillna(): Fills missing values with specified value (e.g., mean).

df1 = df.drop(columns=['Name', 'Ticket', 'Cabin'])
df1.dropna(subset=['Embarked'], inplace=True)
df1['Age'] = df1['Age'].fillna(df1['Age'].mean())
Step 7: Detect Outliers with Box Plot
matplotlib.pyplot.boxplot(): Displays distribution of data, highlighting median, quartiles and outliers.
plt.show(): Renders the plot.

import matplotlib.pyplot as plt

plt.boxplot(df1['Age'], vert=False)
plt.ylabel('Variable')
plt.xlabel('Age')
plt.title('Box Plot')
plt.show()
Output:

boxplot
Boxplot
Step 8: Calculate Outlier Boundaries and Remove Them
Calculate mean and standard deviation (std) using df['Age'].mean() and df['Age'].std().
Define bounds as mean ± 2 * std for outlier detection.
Filter DataFrame rows within bounds using Boolean indexing.

mean = df1['Age'].mean()
std = df1['Age'].std()

lower_bound = mean - 2 * std
upper_bound = mean + 2 * std

df2 = df1[(df1['Age'] >= lower_bound) & (df1['Age'] <= upper_bound)]
Step 9: Impute Missing Data Again if Any
fillna() applied again on filtered data to handle any remaining missing values.


df3 = df2.fillna(df2['Age'].mean())
df3.isnull().sum()
Output:

Screenshot-2025-08-29-122505
Missing Value
Step 10: Recalculate Outlier Bounds and Remove Outliers from the Updated Data
mean = df3['Age'].mean(): Calculates the average (mean) value of the Age column in the DataFrame df3.
std = df3['Age'].std(): Computes the standard deviation (spread or variability) of the Age column in df3.
lower_bound = mean - 2 * std: Defines the lower limit for acceptable Age values, set as two standard deviations below the mean.
upper_bound = mean + 2 * std: Defines the upper limit for acceptable Age values, set as two standard deviations above the mean.
df4 = df3[(df3['Age'] >= lower_bound) & (df3['Age'] <= upper_bound)]: Creates a new DataFrame df4 by selecting only rows where the Age value falls between the lower and upper bounds, effectively removing outlier ages outside this range.

mean = df3['Age'].mean()
std = df3['Age'].std()

lower_bound = mean - 2 * std
upper_bound = mean + 2 * std

print('Lower Bound :', lower_bound)
print('Upper Bound :', upper_bound)

df4 = df3[(df3['Age'] >= lower_bound) & (df3['Age'] <= upper_bound)]
Output:

Screenshot-2025-08-29-122513
Outlier Check
Step 11: Data validation and verification
Data validation and verification involve ensuring that the data is accurate and consistent by comparing it with external sources or expert knowledge.

For the machine learning prediction we separate independent and target features
Here we will consider 'Pclass', 'Sex', 'Age', 'SibSp', 'Parch', 'Fare', and 'Embarked' as independent features.
Survived as target variables because PassengerId will not affect the survival rate

X = df3[['Pclass','Sex','Age', 'SibSp','Parch','Fare','Embarked']]
Y = df3['Survived']
Step 12: Data formatting
Data formatting involves converting the data into a standard format or structure that can be easily processed by the algorithms or models used for analysis. Here we will discuss commonly used data formatting techniques i.e. Scaling and Normalization.

1. Min-Max Scaling: Scaling involves transforming the values of features to a specific range. Min-Max scaling rescales the values to a specified range, typically between 0 and 1. It preserves the original distribution and ensures that the minimum value maps to 0 and the maximum value maps to 1.


from sklearn.preprocessing import MinMaxScaler

scaler = MinMaxScaler(feature_range=(0, 1))

num_col_ = [col for col in X.columns if X[col].dtype != 'object']
x1 = X
x1[num_col_] = scaler.fit_transform(x1[num_col_])
x1.head()
Output:

Screenshot-2025-08-29-122526
Min-Max Scaling
2. Standardization (Z-score scaling): Standardization transforms the values to have a mean of 0 and a standard deviation of 1. It centers the data around the mean and scales it based on the standard deviation. Standardization makes the data more suitable for algorithms that assume a Gaussian distribution or require features to have zero mean and unit variance.

Z = (X - μ) / σ

Where,

X = Data
μ = Mean value of X
σ = Standard deviation of X
You can download the source code from here.

Data Cleaning Strategies
Understand the data: Know the source, structure and domain of the data to identify potential quality issues and determine appropriate cleaning actions.
Document the process: Keep records of decisions, methods, assumptions and rules applied during data cleaning.
Prioritize critical issues: Focus first on major quality problems that could have a systemic impact on analysis or decision-making.
Automate where possible: Use scripts or tools for repetitive cleaning tasks to improve efficiency and consistency.
Collaborate with domain experts: Engage stakeholders or domain specialists to validate that the cleaned data meets business requirements.
Monitor and maintain: Continuously track data quality and perform cleaning periodically to ensure long-term accuracy and reliability.
Advantages
Removing errors, inconsistencies, and irrelevant data helps the model learn better from the data.
Ensures the data is accurate, consistent, and free of errors.
Transforms data into a format that better represents underlying patterns and relationships.
Improves data quality, making it more reliable and accurate.
Helps identify and remove sensitive or confidential information, improving data security.
Disadvantages
It is time-consuming, especially for large and complex datasets.
It can lead to loss of important information if not handled carefully.
Requires significant time, effort, expertise, and sometimes specialized tools.
Removing too much data can contribute to underfitting.

Data Preprocessing in Python
Last Updated :
30 Apr, 2026
Data preprocessing is the first step in any data analysis or machine learning pipeline. It involves cleaning, transforming and organizing raw data to ensure it is accurate, consistent and ready for modeling. It has a big impact on model building such as:

Clean and well-structured data allows models to learn meaningful patterns rather than noise.
Properly processed data prevents misleading inputs, leading to more reliable predictions.
Organized data makes it simpler to create useful inputs for the model, enhancing model performance.
Organized data supports better Exploratory Data Analysis (EDA), making patterns and trends more interpretable.
data_cleaning
Data Preprocessing
Steps-by-Step implementation
Let's implement various preprocessing features,

Step 1: Import Libraries and Load Dataset
We prepare the environment with libraries like pandas, numpy, scikit learn, matplotlib and seaborn for data manipulation, numerical operations, visualization and scaling. Load the dataset for preprocessing.

The sample dataset can be downloaded from here.


import pandas as pd
import numpy as np
from sklearn.preprocessing import MinMaxScaler, StandardScaler
import seaborn as sns
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt

df = pd.read_csv('Geeksforgeeks/Data/diabetes.csv')
df.head()
Output:

Screenshot-2025-08-29-132400
Dataset
Step 2: Inspect Data Structure and Check Missing Values
We understand dataset size, data types and identify any incomplete (missing) data that needs handling.

df.info(): Prints concise summary including count of non-null entries and data type of each column.
df.isnull().sum(): Returns the number of missing values per column.

df.info()
print(df.isnull().sum())
Output:

Screenshot-2025-08-29-132349.webpScreenshot-2025-08-29-132349.webp
Step 3: Statistical Summary and Visualizing Outliers
Get numeric summaries like mean, median, min/max and detect unusual points (outliers). Outliers can skew models if not handled.

df.describe(): Computes count, mean, std deviation, min/max and quartiles for numerical columns.
Boxplots: Visualize spread and detect outliers using matplotlib’s boxplot().

df.describe()

fig, axs = plt.subplots(len(df.columns), 1, figsize=(7, 18), dpi=95)
for i, col in enumerate(df.columns):
    axs[i].boxplot(df[col], vert=False)
    axs[i].set_ylabel(col)
plt.tight_layout()
plt.show()
Output:

boxplot-data-preprocessing
Boxplot
Step 4: Remove Outliers Using the Interquartile Range (IQR) Method
Remove extreme values beyond a reasonable range to improve model robustness.

IQR = Q3 (75th percentile) – Q1 (25th percentile).
Values below Q1 - 1.5IQR or above Q3 + 1.5IQR are outliers.
Calculate lower and upper bounds for each column separately.
Filter data points to keep only those within bounds.

q1, q3 = np.percentile(df['Insulin'], [25, 75])
iqr = q3 - q1
lower = q1 - 1.5 * iqr
upper = q3 + 1.5 * iqr
clean_df = df[(df['Insulin'] >= lower) & (df['Insulin'] <= upper)]
Note: In practice, outlier removal should be applied across all relevant numerical columns to ensure consistent preprocessing.

Step 5: Correlation Analysis
Understand relationships between features and the target variable (Outcome). Correlation helps gauge feature importance.

df.corr(): Computes pairwise correlation coefficients between columns.
Heatmap via seaborn visualizes correlation matrix clearly.
Sorting correlations with corr['Outcome'].sort_values() highlights features most correlated with the target.

corr = df.corr()
plt.figure(dpi=130)
sns.heatmap(corr, annot=True, fmt='.2f', cmap='coolwarm')
plt.show()

print(corr['Outcome'].sort_values(ascending=False))
Output:

seashore.webpseashore.webp
Step 6: Visualize Target Variable Distribution
Check if target classes (Diabetes vs Not Diabetes) are balanced, affecting model training and evaluation.

plt.pie(): Pie chart to display proportion of each class in the target variable 'Outcome'.

plt.pie(clean_df['Outcome'].value_counts(),
        labels=['Diabetes', 'Not Diabetes'],
        autopct='%.f%%', shadow=True)
plt.title('Outcome Proportionality')
plt.show()
Output:

pie
Result
Step 7: Separate Features and Target Variable
Prepare independent variables (features) and dependent variable (target) separately for modeling.

df.drop(columns=[...]): Drops the target column from features.
Direct column selection df['Outcome'] selects target column.

X = df.drop(columns=['Outcome'])
y = df['Outcome']
Step 8: Feature Scaling: Normalization and Standardization
Scale features to a common range or distribution, important for many ML algorithms sensitive to feature magnitudes.

1. Normalization (Min-Max Scaling): Rescales features between 0 and 1. Good for algorithms like k-NN and neural networks.

Class: MinMaxScaler from sklearn.
.fit_transform(): Learns min/max from data and applies scaling.

scaler = MinMaxScaler()
X_normalized = scaler.fit_transform(X)
print(X_normalized[:5])
Output:

Screenshot-2025-08-29-132258
Normalization
2. Standardization: Transforms features to have mean = 0 and standard deviation = 1, useful for normally distributed features.

Class: StandardScaler from sklearn.

scaler = StandardScaler()
X_standardized = scaler.fit_transform(X)
print(X_standardized[:5])
Output:

Screenshot-2025-08-29-132251
Standardization
Advantages
Cleans and organizes raw data for better analysis.
Removes noise and irrelevant data, leading to more precise predictions.
Handles outliers and redundant features, which reduces overfitting.
Scaling data helps models train faster by reducing computation time.
Converts data into formats suitable for machine learning models.

Feature Engineering - Scaling, Normalization and Standardization
Last Updated :
7 Apr, 2026
Well-designed Feature engineering is the process of creating, transforming or selecting important features from raw data to improve model performance. These features help the model capture useful patterns and relationships in the data.

feature_engineering
Feature Engineering
It contributes to model building in the following ways:

Well-designed features help the model to learn complex patterns more effectively.
Removing noise and irrelevant information improves model prediction accuracy.
Focusing on meaningful features helps the model to generalize better and reduces overfitting.
Clear and informative features make the model easier to understand and interpret.
1. Absolute Maximum Scaling
Absolute Maximum Scaling is a feature scaling method where each value is divided by the maximum absolute value of that feature. This transformation rescales the data so that values fall within the range of −1 to 1.

Sensitive to Outliers: Extreme values can affect the maximum value and reduce scaling quality.
Best for Clean Data: Works better when the dataset does not contain strong outliers.
Scaling Formula:
X
s
c
a
l
e
d
=
X
i
m
a
x
(
∣
X
∣
)
X
scaled
​
 =
max(∣X∣)
X
i
​

​


Implementation
 Dataset can be downloaded from here.

Step 1: Import Libraries and Dataset


import pandas as pd
import numpy as np

df = pd.read_csv('Housing.csv')

df = df.select_dtypes(include=np.number)
df.head()
Output:

Screenshot-2025-08-29-163245
Dataset
Step 2: Apply Absolute Maximum Scaling

np.max(np.abs(df), axis=0): Calculates the maximum absolute value for each column.
df / max_abs: Divides each value by the maximum absolute value of its column to scale the data.
scaled_df.head(): Displays the first few rows of the scaled dataset.

max_abs = np.max(np.abs(df), axis=0)

scaled_df = df / max_abs

scaled_df.head()
Output:

Screenshot-2025-08-29-163253
Absolute Maximum Scaling
2. Min-Max Scaling
Min-Max Scaling rescales features by subtracting the minimum value and dividing by the difference between the maximum and minimum values. This usually maps feature values to the range 0 to 1 while preserving the original distribution.

Scaling Formula:
X
s
c
a
l
e
d
=
X
i
−
X
min
X
m
a
x
−
X
m
i
n
X
scaled
​
 =
X
max
​
 −X
min
​

X
i
​
 −X
min
​

​


Implementation
MinMaxScaler(): Creates a scaler object for Min-Max scaling.
scaler.fit_transform(df): Calculates min and max values and scales the dataset between 0 and 1.

from sklearn.preprocessing import MinMaxScaler

scaler = MinMaxScaler()
scaled_data = scaler.fit_transform(df)
scaled_df = pd.DataFrame(scaled_data, columns=df.columns)

scaled_df.head()
Output:

Screenshot-2025-08-29-163300
Min-Max Scaling
3. Normalization (Vector Normalization)
Normalization scales each data sample so that its vector length (Euclidean norm) becomes 1. It focuses on the direction of data points rather than their magnitude, making it useful in tasks like text classification and clustering.

Scaling Formula:
X
scaled
=
X
i
∥
X
∥
X
scaled
​
 =
∥X∥
X
i
​

​


Where:

X
i
X
i
​
  is each individual value.
∥
X
∥
∥X∥ represents the Euclidean norm (or length) of the vector
X
X.
Normalizes each sample to unit length.
Useful for direction-based similarity metrics.
Implementation
Normalizer(): Creates a normalizer object to scale data.
scaler.fit_transform(df): Normalizes each row so its vector length becomes 1.

from sklearn.preprocessing import Normalizer

scaler = Normalizer()
scaled_data = scaler.fit_transform(df)
scaled_df = pd.DataFrame(scaled_data, columns=df.columns)

scaled_df.head()
Output:

Screenshot-2025-08-29-163307
Normalization
4. Standardization
Standardization scales features by subtracting the mean and dividing by the standard deviation. This transforms the data so that features have zero mean and unit variance, which helps many machine learning models perform better.

Scaling Formula:
X
s
c
a
l
e
d
=
X
i
−
μ
σ
X
scaled
​
 =
σ
X
i
​
 −μ
​


where
μ
μ = mean,
σ
σ = standard deviation.
Produces features with mean 0 and variance 1.
Effective for data approximately normally distributed.
Implementation
standardScaler(): Creates a scaler for standardizing the data.
scaler.fit_transform(df): Subtracts the mean and divides by the standard deviation.

from sklearn.preprocessing import StandardScaler

scaler = StandardScaler()
scaled_data = scaler.fit_transform(df)
scaled_df = pd.DataFrame(scaled_data,
                         columns=df.columns)
print(scaled_df.head())
Output:

Screenshot-2025-08-29-163316
Standardization
5. Robust Scaling
Robust Scaling scales features using the median and interquartile range (IQR) instead of the mean and standard deviation. This makes it less sensitive to outliers and skewed data, making it suitable for datasets with extreme values or noise.

Scaling Formula:
X
s
c
a
l
e
d
=
X
i
−
X
median
I
Q
R
X
scaled
​
 =
IQR
X
i
​
 −X
median
​

​


Implementation
RobustScaler(): Creates a scaler that uses median and IQR for scaling.
scaler.fit_transform(df): Scales the data while reducing the influence of outliers.

from sklearn.preprocessing import RobustScaler

scaler = RobustScaler()
scaled_data = scaler.fit_transform(df)
scaled_df = pd.DataFrame(scaled_data,
                         columns=df.columns)
print(scaled_df.head())
Output:

Screenshot-2025-08-29-163327
Robust Scaling
Comparison of Various Feature Scaling Techniques
Let's see the key differences across the five main feature scaling techniques commonly used in machine learning preprocessing.

Type

Method Description

Sensitivity to Outliers

Typical Use Cases

Absolute Maximum Scaling

Divides values by max absolute value in each feature

High

Sparse data, simple scaling

Min-Max Scaling (Normalization)

Scales features to by min-max normalization

High

Neural networks, bounded input features

Normalization (Vector Norm)

Scales each sample vector to unit length (norm = 1)

Not applicable (per row)

Direction-based similarity, text classification
Standardization (Z-Score)

Centers features to mean 0 and scales to unit variance

Moderate

Most ML algorithms, assumes approx. normal data

Robust Scaling

Centers on median and scales using IQR

Low

Data with outliers, skewed distributions

Advantages
Improves Model Performance: Enhances accuracy and predictive power by presenting features in comparable scales.
Speeds Up Convergence: Helps gradient-based algorithms train faster and more reliably.
Prevents Feature Bias: Avoids dominance of large-scale features, ensuring fair contribution from all features.
Increases Numerical Stability: Reduces risks of overflow/underflow in computations.
Facilitates Algorithm Compatibility: Makes data suitable for distance- and gradient-based models like SVM, KNN and neural networks.

Feature Extraction
Last Updated :
30 Apr, 2026
Feature extraction transforms raw data into meaningful and structured features that machine learning models can easily interpret. It organizes complex data into clear and useful variables so that patterns and relationships in the data can be understood more easily. This step prepares the data in a form that supports effective analysis and prediction.

Converts raw and unstructured data into useful features
Represents the important characteristics of the dataset through clear variables
Helps machine learning models learn patterns and relationships in data by providing meaningful inputs
features_11.webpfeatures_11.webp
Importance of Feature Extraction
Reduces computation by simplifying complex raw data.
Improves model performance using relevant features.
Provides better insights by removing noise.
Helps prevent overfitting by reducing feature complexity.
Key Techniques for Feature Extraction
1. Statistical Methods
Statistical methods are used in feature extraction to summarize and explain patterns of data. Common data attributes include:

stat
Statistical Methods
Mean: The average value of a dataset.
Median: The middle value when it is sorted in ascending order.
Standard Deviation: A measure of the spread or dispersion of a sample.
Correlation and Covariance: Measures of the linear relationship between two or more factors.
These statistical methods can be used to represent the center trend, spread and links within a collection.

2. Dimensionality Reduction
Dimensionality reduction reduces the number of features without losing important information. Some popular methods are:

dim1.pngdim1.png
Principal Component Analysis: It transforms original features into new orthogonal components that capture maximum variance in the data.
Linear Discriminant Analysis (LDA): It finds the best combination of features to separate different classes, maximizing class separability for better classification.
t-Distributed Stochastic Neighbor Embedding (t-SNE): A technique that reduces high-dimensional data into two or three dimensions ideal for visualizing complex datasets.
3. Feature Extraction for Textual Data
In Natural Language Processing (NLP), we often convert raw text into a format that machine learning models can understand.

Bag of Words (BoW): Represents a document by counting word frequencies, ignoring word order, useful for basic text classification.
Term Frequency-Inverse Document Frequency (TF-IDF): Adjusts word importance based on frequency in a specific document compared to all documents, highlighting unique terms.
4. Signal Processing Methods
It is used for analyzing time-series, audio and sensor data:

origsig
Signal processing methods
Fourier Transform: It converts a signal from the time domain to the frequency domain to analyze its frequency components.
Wavelet Transform: It analyzes signals that vary over time, offering both time and frequency information for non-stationary signals.
5. Image Data Extraction
Techniques for extracting features from images:

cnnhog
Image Data Extraction
Histogram of Oriented Gradients (HOG): This technique finds the distribution of intensity gradients or edge directions in an image. It's used in object detection and recognition tasks.
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) Features: They learn hierarchical features from images through layers of convolutions, ideal for classification and detection tasks.
Choosing the Right Method
Selecting the appropriate feature extraction method depends on the type of data and the specific problem we're solving. It requires careful consideration and often domain expertise.

Information Loss: Feature extraction might simplify the data too much, potentially losing important information in the process.
Computational Complexity: Some methods, especially for large datasets can be computationally expensive and may require significant resources.
Feature Selection vs. Feature Extraction
Since Feature Selection and Feature Extraction are related but not the same, let’s quickly see the key differences between them for a better understanding:

Aspect	Feature Selection	Feature Extraction
Definition	Selecting a subset of relevant features from the original set	Transforming the original features into a new set of features
Purpose	Reduce dimensionality	Transform data into a more manageable or informative representation
Process	Filtering, wrapper methods, embedded methods	Signal processing, statistical techniques, transformation algorithms
Output	Subset of selected features	New set of transformed features
Computational Cost	Lower cost	May be higher, especially for complex transformations
Interpretability	Retains interpretability of original features	May lose interpretability depending on transformation
Tools and Libraries for Feature Extraction
There are several tools and libraries available for feature extraction across different domains. Let's see some popular ones:

Scikit-learn: It offers tools for various machine learning tasks including PCA, ICA and preprocessing methods for feature extraction.
OpenCV: A popular computer vision library with functions for image feature extraction such as SIFT, SURF and ORB.
TensorFlow / Keras: These deep learning libraries in Python provide APIs for building and training neural networks which can be used for feature extraction from image, text and other types of data.
PyTorch: A deep learning library enabling custom neural network designs for feature extraction and other tasks.
NLTK (Natural Language Toolkit): A popular NLP library providing feature extraction methods like bag-of-words, TF-IDF and word embeddings for text data.
Applications
Computer Vision and Image Processing: Used in autonomous vehicles to detect road signs and pedestrians by extracting key visual features for safe navigation.
Natural Language Processing (NLP): Powers email spam filtering by extracting textual features to accurately classify messages as spam or legitimate.
Biomedical Engineering: Extracting features from EEG or MRI signals helps diagnose neurological disorders or detect early signs of disease.
Industrial and Equipment Monitoring: Predictive maintenance uses sensor data features to foresee machine failures, reducing downtime and repair costs.
Financial and Fraud Detection: Analyzes transaction patterns to identify fraudulent activities and prevent financial losses.
Advantages
Simplifies Data: Reduces complex data into a manageable form for easier analysis and visualization.
Boosts Model Performance: Removes irrelevant data, making algorithms faster and more accurate.
Highlights Key Patterns: Filters out noise to focus on important features for quicker insights.
Improves Generalization: Helps models perform better on new, unseen data by emphasizing informative features.
Speeds Up Training and Prediction: Fewer features mean faster model training and real-time predictions.
Challenges
Managing High-Dimensional Data: Extracting relevant features from large, complex datasets can be difficult.
Risk of Overfitting or Underfitting: Too many or too few features can hurt model accuracy and generalization.
Computational Costs: Complex methods may require heavy resources, limiting use with big or real-time data.
Redundant or Irrelevant Features: Overlapping or noisy features can confuse models and reduce efficiency.

Feature Engineering
Last Updated :
30 Apr, 2026
Feature Engineering is the process of selecting, creating or modifying features like input variables or data to help machine learning models learn patterns more effectively. It involves transforming raw data into meaningful inputs that improve model accuracy and performance.

feature-engineering
Feature Engineering Architecture
This step may include handling missing values, encoding categories, scaling numbers, creating new features or combining existing ones. It helps turn messy real-world data into a form that models can understand and use for better predictions.

Importance of Feature Engineering
Improve accuracy: Choosing the right features helps the model learn better, leading to more accurate predictions.
Reduce overfitting: Using fewer, more important features helps the model avoid memorizing the data and perform better on new data.
Boost interpretability: Well-chosen features make it easier to understand how the model makes its predictions.
Enhance efficiency: Focusing on key features speeds up the model’s training and prediction process, saving time and resources.
Processes Involved in Feature Engineering
Lets see various features involved in feature engineering:

processes
Processes involved in Feature Engineering
1. Feature Creation: Feature creation involves generating new features from domain knowledge or by observing patterns in the data. It can be:

Domain-specific: Created based on industry knowledge like business rules.
Data-driven: Derived by recognizing patterns in data.
Synthetic: Formed by combining existing features.
2. Feature Transformation: Transformation adjusts features to improve model learning:

Normalization & Scaling: Adjust the range of features for consistency.
Encoding: Converts categorical data to numerical form i.e one-hot encoding.
Mathematical transformations: Like logarithmic transformations for skewed data.
3. Feature Extraction: Transform existing features into a lower-dimensional or more informative representation (e.g., PCA).

Dimensionality reduction: Techniques like PCA reduce features while preserving important information.
Aggregation & Combination: Summing or averaging features to simplify the model.
4. Feature Selection: Feature selection involves choosing a subset of relevant features to use:

Filter methods: Based on statistical measures like correlation.
Wrapper methods: Select based on model performance.
Embedded methods: Feature selection integrated within model training.
5. Feature Scaling: Scaling ensures that all features contribute equally to the model:

Min-Max scaling: Rescales values to a fixed range like 0 to 1.
Standard scaling: Standardizes features to have mean 0 and variance 1
Steps in Feature Engineering
Feature engineering can vary depending on the specific problem but the general steps are:

Data Cleaning: Identify and correct errors or inconsistencies in the dataset to ensure data quality and reliability.
Data Transformation: Transform raw data into a format suitable for modeling including scaling, normalization and encoding.
Feature Extraction: Create new features by combining or deriving information from existing ones to provide more meaningful input to the model.
Feature Selection: Choose the most relevant features for the model using techniques like correlation analysis, mutual information and stepwise regression.
Feature Iteration: Continuously refine features based on model performance by adding, removing or modifying features for improvement.
Common Techniques in Feature Engineering
1. One-Hot Encoding: One-Hot Encoding converts categorical variables into binary indicators, allowing them to be used by machine learning models.


import pandas as pd

data = {'Color': ['Red', 'Blue', 'Green', 'Blue']}
df = pd.DataFrame(data)

df_encoded = pd.get_dummies(df, columns=['Color'], prefix='Color')

print(df_encoded)

Output
   Color_Blue  Color_Green  Color_Red
0       False        False       True
1        True        False      False
2       False         True      False
3        True        False      False
2. Binning: Binning transforms continuous variables into discrete bins, making them categorical for easier analysis.


import pandas as pd

data = {'Age': [23, 45, 18, 34, 67, 50, 21]}
df = pd.DataFrame(data)

bins = [0, 20, 40, 60, 100]
labels = ['0-20', '21-40', '41-60', '61+']

df['Age_Group'] = pd.cut(df['Age'], bins=bins, labels=labels, right=False)

print(df)

Output
   Age Age_Group
0   23     21-40
1   45     41-60
2   18      0-20
3   34     21-40
4   67       61+
5   50     41-60
6   21     21-40
3. Text Data Preprocessing: Involves removing stop-words, stemming and vectorizing text data to prepare it for machine learning models.


import nltk
from nltk.corpus import stopwords
from nltk.stem import PorterStemmer
from sklearn.feature_extraction.text import CountVectorizer

texts = ["This is a sample sentence.", "Text data preprocessing is important."]

stop_words = set(stopwords.words('english'))
stemmer = PorterStemmer()
vectorizer = CountVectorizer()


def preprocess_text(text):
    words = text.split()
    words = [stemmer.stem(word)
             for word in words if word.lower() not in stop_words]
    return " ".join(words)


cleaned_texts = [preprocess_text(text) for text in texts]

X = vectorizer.fit_transform(cleaned_texts)

print("Cleaned Texts:", cleaned_texts)
print("Vectorized Text:", X.toarray())
Output:

output
4. Feature Splitting: Divides a single feature into multiple sub-features, uncovering valuable insights and improving model performance.


import pandas as pd

data = {'Full_Address': [
    '123 Elm St, Springfield, 12345', '456 Oak Rd, Shelbyville, 67890']}
df = pd.DataFrame(data)

df[['Street', 'City', 'Zipcode']] = df['Full_Address'].str.extract(
    r'([0-9]+\s[\w\s]+),\s([\w\s]+),\s(\d+)')

print(df)

Output
                     Full_Address      Street         City Zipcode
0  123 Elm St, Springfield, 12345  123 Elm St  Springfield   12345
1  456 Oak Rd, Shelbyville, 67890  456 Oak Rd  Shelbyville   67890...
Tools for Feature Engineering
Featuretools: Automates feature creation from structured data with easy library integration.
TPOT: Uses genetic algorithms to optimize pipelines and feature selection.
DataRobot: Automates ML workflows with support for various data types and teamwork.
Alteryx: Provides a drag-and-drop interface for data preparation and feature engineering.
H2O.ai: Offers tools for feature engineering, scaling, encoding, and visualization.

Feature Selection Techniques in Machine Learning
Last Updated :
11 Jun, 2026
Feature selection is the process of choosing only the most useful input features for a machine learning model. It helps improve model performance, reduces noise and makes results easier to understand.

Helps remove irrelevant and redundant features
Improves accuracy and reduces overfitting
Speeds up model training
Makes models simpler and easier to interpret
binary_number_system.webpbinary_number_system.webp
Need of Feature Selection
Feature selection methods are essential in data science and machine learning for several key reasons:

Improved Accuracy: Models learn better when trained on only important features.
Faster Training: Fewer features reduce computation time.
Greater Interpretability: With fewer inputs, understanding model behavior becomes easier.
Avoiding the Curse of Dimensionality: Reduces complexity when working with high-dimensional data.
Types of Feature Selection Methods
There are various algorithms used for feature selection and are grouped into three main categories and each one has its own strengths and trade-offs depending on the use case.

1. Filter Methods
Filter methods evaluate each feature independently with respect to the target variable. Features are selected based on statistical measures that indicate their relevance to the target. These methods are commonly used in the preprocessing phase to remove irrelevant or redundant features.

Do not rely only on correlation
Use different statistical techniques depending on data type
Fast and model-independent feature selection approach
filter
Filter Method
Common Filter Techniques

Information Gain: Measures reduction in entropy when a feature is used.
Chi-square test: Checks the relationship between categorical features.
Fisher’s Score: Ranks features based on class separability.
Pearson’s Correlation Coefficient: Measures linear relationship between two continuous variables.
Variance Threshold: Removes features with very low variance.
Mean Absolute Difference: Similar to variance threshold but uses absolute differences.
Dispersion ratio: Ratio of arithmetic mean to geometric mean; higher values indicate useful features.
Advantages

Fast and efficient: Filter methods are computationally inexpensive, making them ideal for large datasets.
Easy to implement: These methods are often built-in to popular machine learning libraries, requiring minimal coding effort.
Model Independence: Filter methods can be used with any type of machine learning model, making them versatile tools.
Limitations

Limited interaction with the model: Since they operate independently, filter methods might miss data interactions that could be important for prediction.
Choosing the right metric: Selecting the appropriate metric for our data and task is important for optimal performance.
2. Wrapper methods
Wrapper methods are feature selection techniques that evaluate different combinations of features by measuring their impact on model performance. They use search strategies to add or remove features and select the optimal subset based on predefined stopping criteria.

Evaluates feature subsets using a machine learning model
Uses greedy or non-greedy search strategies
Measures the relationship between feature subsets and the target variable
Adds or removes features based on model performance
Stops when performance decreases or the desired number of features is reached
wrapper
Wrapper Method
Common Wrapper Techniques

Forward Selection: Start with no features and add one at a time based on improvement.
Backward Elimination: Start with all features and remove the least useful ones.
Recursive Feature Elimination (RFE): Removes the least important features step by step.
Advantages
Model-specific optimization: Wrapper methods directly consider how features influence the model, potentially leading to better performance compared to filter methods.
Flexible: These methods can be adapted to various model types and evaluation metrics.
Limitations
Computationally expensive: Evaluating different feature combinations can be time-consuming, especially for large datasets.
Risk of overfitting: Fine-tuning features to a specific model can lead to an overfitted model that performs poorly on unseen data.
3. Embedded methods
Embedded methods perform feature selection during the model training process. They combine the benefits of both filter and wrapper methods. Feature selection is integrated into the model training allowing the model to select the most relevant features based on the training process dynamically.

embedded
Embedded Method
Common Embedded Techniques

L1 Regularization (Lasso): Keeps only features with non-zero coefficients.
Decision Trees and Random Forests: Select features based on impurity reduction.
Gradient Boosting: Pick features that reduce prediction error the most
Advantages

Efficient and effective: Embedded methods can achieve good results without the computational burden of some wrapper methods.
Model-specific learning: Similar to wrapper methods these techniques uses the learning process to identify relevant features.
Limitations

Limited interpretability: Embedded methods can be more challenging to interpret compared to filter methods making it harder to understand why specific features were chosen.
Not universally applicable: Not all machine learning algorithms support embedded feature selection techniques.
Choosing the Right Feature Selection Method
Choice of feature selection method depends on several factors:

Dataset size: Filter methods are generally faster for large datasets while wrapper methods might be suitable for smaller datasets.
Model type: Some models like tree-based models, have built-in feature selection capabilities.
Interpretability: If understanding the rationale behind feature selection is crucial, filter methods might be a better choice.
Computational resources: Wrapper methods can be time-consuming, so consider our available computing power.
With these feature selection methods we can easily improve performance of our model and reduce its computational cost.